First version of spec (#1)
pystatgen/vcf-zarr-spec: vcf_zarr_spec.md

# VCF Zarr specification

***Version 0.1***

> This document is a technical specification for VCF Zarr, an equivalent of VCF that uses Zarr storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document is a technical specification for VCF Zarr, a means of encoding VCF data in chunked-columnar form using the Zarr format.
```
I thought it good to give some more concrete details here? This is just a suggestion, my wording isn't great.

A VCF Zarr store is composed of a top-level Zarr group that contains VCF header information stored as Zarr group attributes,
and VCF fields and sample information stored as Zarr arrays.

## VCF Zarr group attributes

The VCF Zarr store contains the following mandatory attributes:

| Key                | Value                                                                                |
|--------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `vcf_zarr_version` | `0.1`                                                                                |
| `vcf_header`       | The VCF header from `##fileformat` to `#CHROM` inclusive, stored as a single string. |
| `contigs`          | A list of strings of the contig IDs in the same order as specified in the header.    |
| `filters`          | A list of strings of the filters in the same order as specified in the header, except for `PASS`, which is always first. |

The `contigs` attribute plays the same role as the dictionary of contigs in BCF, providing a way of encoding a contig (in the `variant_contig` array) with an integer offset into the `contigs` list.

## VCF Zarr arrays

> Each VCF field is stored in a separate Zarr array. This specification only mandates the path, shape, dimension names, and dtype of each array. Other array metadata, including chunks, compression, layout order is not specified here.

Reviewer: We don't necessarily mandate the dtype, do we? I could perfectly well store genotypes as int16 if I wanted to and it shouldn't break stuff.

Author: We don't mandate the size of the dtype (this is explained later in the spec), just the kind (int vs float). I've updated to wording to say "general dtype".

Reviewer: That's good - it's an important point to clarify I think, readers won't naturally assume that the width of the basic numeric types (int/float) is flexible.

| `str`     | `\|O`          | String    |

This specification does not mandate a byte order for numeric types: little-endian (e.g. `<i4`) or big-endian (`>i4`) are both permitted.

The `str` dtype is used to represent [variable-length strings](https://zarr.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorial.html#string-arrays). In this case a Zarr array filter with and `id` of `vlen-utf8` must be specified for the array.

### Missing and fill values

Missing values indicate the value is absent, and fill values are used to pad variable length fields. The following float values are based on the "signalling NaN" values used in BCF. Note that the BCF specification refers to fill values as "END_OF_VECTOR" values.

| Dtype     | Missing    | Fill          |
|-----------|------------|---------------|
| `int  `   | -1         | -2            |
| `float  ` | NaN (0x7F800001 32-bit, 0x7FF8000000000001 64-bit) | NaN (0x7F800002 32-bit, 0x7FF0000000000002 64-bit)    |
| `char`    | "."        | ""            |
| `str`     | "."        | ""            |

There is no need for missing or fill values for the `bool` dtype, since Type=Flag fields can only appear in INFO fields, and they always have Number=0.

> In addition to encoding the missing and fill status in the values, some implementations may choose to store this information in accompanying Zarr arrays of the same shape. This make masking out missing data easier for the user, since they don't have to know how missing and fill values are encoded for each type.

Reviewer: Missing word "This ... make"

### Fixed fields

The fixed VCF fields `CHROM`, `POS`, `ID`, `REF`, `ALT`, `QUAL`, and `FILTER` are stored as Zarr arrays according to the following table. Note that the `REF` and `ALT` fields are combined into a single Zarr array.

| VCF field(s) | Zarr array path    | Shape                 | Dimension names       | Dtype   |
|--------------|--------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|---------|
| `CHROM`      | `variant_contig`   | `(variants)`          | `[variants]`          | `int`   |
| `POS`        | `variant_position` | `(variants)`          | `[variants]`          | `int`   |
| `ID`         | `variant_id`       | `(variants)`          | `[variants]`          | `str`   |
| `REF`, `ALT` | `variant_allele`   | `(variants, alleles)` | `[variants, alleles]` | `str`   |
| `QUAL`       | `variant_quality`  | `(variants)`          | `[variants]`          | `float` |
| `FILTER`     | `variant_filter`   | `(variants, filters)` | `[variants, filters]` | `bool`  |

> Each value in the `variant_contig` array is an integer offset into the `contigs` attribute list.

Reviewer: Worth saying "(zero-based) integer offset" here, just in case?

> The `variant_filter` array contains a true value at position `i` if the filter at position `i` in the `filters` attribute list applies for a given variant. If not filters have been applied

Reviewer: s/not/no

for a variant, all values are false.

### INFO fields

Each INFO field is stored as a two-dimensional Zarr array at a path with name `variant_<field>`, of shape `(variants, <Number>)`, dimension names `[variants, <Number dimension name>]`. Dtypes, and missing and fill values are encoded as described above.

### FORMAT fields

Each FORMAT field is stored as a three-dimensional Zarr array at a path with name `call_<field>`, of shape `(variants, samples, <Number>)`, dimension names `[variants, samples, <Number dimension name>]`. Dtypes, and missing and fill values are encoded as described above.

A **Genotype (GT) field** is stored as a three-dimensional Zarr array at a path with name `call_genotype`, of shape `(variants, samples, ploidy)`, with an `int` dtype. Values encode the allele, with 0 for REF, 1 for the first alternate non-reference allele, and so on. A value of -1 indicates missing, and -2 indicates fill in mixed-ploidy datasets.

> To indicate phasing, there is an optional accompanying Zarr array at a path with name `call_genotype_phased`, of shape `(variants, samples)`, with dtype `bool`. Values are true if a call is phased, false if unphased (or not present). If the array is not present then all calls are unphased.

Reviewer: Seems wasteful to force a whole other matrix to say "everthing is phased". I've opened #2 to track.

Author: Good point. Implementing this will take a bit of care - see discussion in #2. Are you happy to merge this PR in the meantime?

Reviewer: Sure, merge away.
